A pivot table is
a way of summarizing
data in a DataFrame for
a particular purpose.
It makes heavy use of
this aggregation function
we've been talking about.
A pivot table is in
itself a DataFrame,
where the rows represent
one variable that
you're interested in,
the columns another, and
then the cells
some aggregate value.
A pivot table also tends to
include marginal values as well,
which are sum for
each column and row.
This allows you to be able
to see the relationship
between two variables
at just a glance.
Let's take a look at
pivot tables in Pandas.
So we'll import Pandas as
pd and import NumPy as np.
So here we have the Times Higher
Education World University
Ranking dataset,
one of the most influential
dataset for universities.
So let's import this dataset
and see what it looks like.
So DataFrame is pd.read_csv
and we can find this in
datasets/cwurData.csv.
Let's look at the head of that.
So here we can see that each
institutions rank, country,
quality of education
and other metrics,
and overall score are shown.
Let's say we wanted to create a
new column called Rank_Level,
where institutions
with world rankings
1-100 are categorized
as first tier,
and those with world rankings
101 to 200 are second tier,
and ranking 201 to
300 are third tier.
Then after 301, we'll just bucket
those as other top universities.
Now, you actually already
have enough knowledge to do this.
So why don't you pause
the video and give it a try?
So here's my solution.
I'm going to create a function
called create_category which will
operate on the first column in
the data frame, world_rank.
So I'll def create_category
with some and it'll
take some ranking.
So since the rank
is just an integer,
I'll just do a bunch
of if/elif statements.
So if it's greater than or equal
to one or less than a 100,
we'll make it a first tier.
For greater than or equal
to 101 but less than 200,
we'll say it's a second top tier,
and we'll do our third
tier here as well,
and then the default will
just be return
other top university.
So now we can apply this to
a single column of data
to create a new series.
So df sub Rank_Level,
remember this creates
a new column,
equals df sub world_rank.apply.
Then we're going to pass
in a Lambda function.
The Lambda function
will just call
create_category on
our particular row.
Let's take a look at
the results, so df.head.
So a pivot table allows us to
pivot out one of
these columns into
new column headers and
compare it against
another column as row indices.
Let's say we want to
compare the rank level
versus country of the university.
So we want to compare it
in terms of overall score.
So to do this, we tell Pandas
we want the values to be score,
and the index to be the country,
and the columns to
be the rank levels.
So there's three things
at play here.
Then we specify
the aggregation function.
Here we use the NumPy mean to get
an average rating
for universities
in that country.
So df.pivot_table, it's
a top-level function
right on the DataFrame.
We say the values are
going to be the score,
the index is going to be country,
and the columns we're
going to use rank level.
Then we pass in our actual
aggregation function
which is the NumPy mean function.
Let's look at the head of this.
So we can see
a hierarchical DataFrame,
where the index or rows are by
country and the columns
have two levels.
The top level indicating
that the mean value is being
used and the second level
being our ranks.
In this example, we
only have one variable,
the mean, that we're looking at.
So we don't really need
a hierarchical index.
We notice that there are
some Not a Number values.
For example, the first
row for Argentina.
The NaN values indicate
that Argentina only
has observations in the other
top university category.
Now, pivot tables aren't limited
to one function that you
might want to apply.
You can pass a named
parameter aggfunk,
which is a list of the different
functions to apply,
and pandas will provide you with
the result using
hierarchical column names.
Let's try that same query,
but passing the max function too.
So I'm just going to do df.
pivot_table, values again,
we're going to call that score,
index is country, and
columns is Rank_Level.
But now we're going
to pass in aggfunc is
a list and we're going
to pass in two values,
np.mean which is
a definition of a function.
So remember were not
invoking the function here,
but passing a reference
to it and np.max.
So both of these in our list,
let's look at the head of that.
So now we see that we have
both the mean and the max.
As mentioned earlier, we can also
summarize the values within
a given top-level group.
For instance, if we wanted to
see an overall average for
the country with the mean
and we wanted to see
the max of the max,
we can indicate that
we want Pandas to do
this by providing
marginal values.
So our function looks
basically the same.
We pass in aggfunc
with our two values,
but then we just add
an extra parameter
to the end called
margins equals true.
Let's take a look at
what that looks like.
So a pivot table is
just a multi-level dataframe,
and we can access
series or cells in
that dataframe in a similar way
as a regular dataframe.
So let's create a new dataframe
from our previous example.
So I'm just going to
take the previous
example and assign that to
a new variable called the new_df.
Then let's take a look at
the index and see
what that looks like.
So I'll just print out the
index of this dataframe,
and let's take a look
at the columns and
just print out the column values.
So we can see that the
columns are hierarchical.
The top-level column indices
have two categories,
mean and max.
The lower level
column indices have
four categories which are
the four rank levels.
So how would we query this,
if we wanted to get
the average scores of
the first top tier university
levels in each country?
We would just need to make
to dataframe projections.
The first for the mean and
the second for the top tier.
So for instance, we could
do new_df sub mean.
So this is projecting
just the mean that we want.
Then from that, we get
another dataframe
and we just project
the First Top Tier
University column.
Let's look at the head of that.
So we can see that
the output here is
a series object which we can
confirm by printing the type.
Remember that when you project
a single column of values,
which is what we're
doing here after we
make the two projections,
out of the DataFrame,
you get a series object.
So let's just look
at the type of this.
We see it's a panda core.
series. series. So what
if we wanted to find
the country that has
the maximum average score
on First Tier Top
University level?
For this, we can use
the idxmax function.
So again, I'll take
our new df, project mean,
and then project
our First Tier Top University,
and on the series object,
we'll just call idxmax.
So now, the idxmax function
isn't actually a special value
for pivot tables.
It's a built-in function
to the series object.
We don't have time to go over
all the pandas functions and
attributes in this course.
I want to really
encourage you to explore
the API to learn more deeply
what is available to you.
If you wanted to achieve
a different shape
of your pivot table,
you can do so with the stack
and unstack functions.
Stacking is pivoting
the lowest column index
to become the
innermost row index,
and unstacking is
just the inverse of stacking,
pivoting the innermost
row index to
become the lowermost
column index.
An example will help make
this a little bit more clear.
So let's look at our pivot table
first to refresh
what it looks like.
So new_df.head.
That's our pivot table.
So now let's try stacking,
and this should move
the lowermost columns.
So the tiers of
the university rankings
to the inner most row.
So we'll just create
a new DataFrame and new
df.stack and let's look
at the head of that.
So here we can see that column
just transposed
essentially into the rows.
In the original pivot table,
the rank levels are
the lowermost column.
After stacking, rank levels
become the innermost index,
appearing to the right
just after the country.
Now let's try unstacking this.
So new_df.unstack.head.
So that seems to restore
our DataFrame to
its original shape.
So what do you think
would happen if
we unstack twice in a row?
Let's try it,
new_df.unstack.unstack.head.
So we actually end up
unstacking all the way
to just a single column.
So we get a series object
being returned.
This column is just a value,
the meaning of
which is denoted by
the hierarchical index of
operation, rank, and country.
So that's pivot tables.
This has been a pretty
short description,
but they're incredibly useful
in dealing with numeric data,
especially if you're trying to
summarize the data in some form.
You'll regularly be creating
new pivot tables on
different slices of data,
whether you're exploring
the data yourself or
preparing that data for
others to report on.
Of course, you can pass
any functions you want to
the aggregate function,
including those that
you define yourself.